He did not miss the sign the first time,
but the second time, it meant his life.
He was Moses.
Our lives are full of signposts
—figurative markers for lessons,
memories, experiences.
Some good, some bad.
Some signposts we erect;
others are put up for us.
In either case, they should help us
to continue in life successfully.
For instance, consider a lesson
—a signpost—
in the life of Moses.
It happened
shortly after the crossing of the Red Sea,
and it’s recorded in Exodus chapter 17.
At a place called Rephidim,
the Israelites gathered and there was Moses
by a crag with his staff
and with a quarreling nation.
The events there at Rephidim
provided a significant lesson for Moses
—something to remember
for future circumstances.
And so he marked that spot.
How did he do it?
He changed the name from Rephidim,
which means “Refresh,”
to Meribah,
which means “Quarreling.”
Little did Moses know
that that name would ring in his ears.
Thirty-nine years later,
at a place called Kadesh,
Moses was again near a crag with his staff
and with a quarreling nation before him.
And based on the events that happened there,
look at what is recorded
at Numbers 20:12, 13.
At Numbers 20:12, 13, we read:
“Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron:
“‘Because you did not show faith in me
“‘and sanctify me
before the eyes of the people of Israel,
“‘you will not bring this congregation
“into the land that I will give them.’
“These are the waters of Meribah,
“where the Israelites quarreled with Jehovah,
so that he was sanctified among them.”
Moses is taught a lesson here.
It’s unclear who exactly
named the place Meribah,
but Moses did record
that these were “the waters of Meribah”
—an unforgettable signpost in Moses’ life.
What it meant to Moses was very clear.
So, what now?
What would Moses do following this?
Well, from verse 14 (if we were to read it),
we would see that Moses
carried on with his assignment.
He continued to lead the Israelites.
He led them against the Kings Sihon and Og.
He began to see Jehovah’s mighty arm of power
as they drew closer and closer
to the Promised Land.
And in his enthusiasm,
Moses makes one request of Jehovah.
He turns to him, and we can read his words
at Deuteronomy 3:25, 26.
Moses’ words in verse 25, he writes:
“‘Please let me pass over
and see the good land
“that is across the Jordan,
this good mountainous region and Lebanon.’
“But Jehovah was still furious
with me because of you,
“and he would not listen to me.
“Rather, Jehovah said to me,
‘Enough from you!
Never speak to me again about this matter.’”
“Jehovah was still furious with me
because of you.”
Meribah—that’s what Moses was referring to.
The signpost was clear for Moses.
How would Moses respond to this?
What would he do?
Well, Moses carried on.
He got back to work, back to business.
He wasn’t finished.
He continued to lead and shepherd the nation.
He prepared Joshua to be his successor.
And he worked along until Jehovah
came to Moses and said to him,
“Moses, it’s time to go to the mountain.”
In other words, it was time for Moses’ death.
Read, please, Jehovah’s words to Moses
at Deuteronomy 32:51, 52.
Beginning in verse 51
of Deuteronomy chapter 32,
we read Jehovah’s words:
“Because both of you
[that is, Moses and Aaron]
“were unfaithful to me among the Israelites
“at the waters of Meribah of Kadesh
“in the wilderness of Zin,
“because you did not sanctify me
before the people of Israel.
“You will see the land from a distance,
but you will not enter the land
that I am giving to the people of Israel.”
Jehovah draws Moses’ attention
back to Meribah.
What effect did this have on Moses
when Jehovah referred to Meribah again?
Well, think of this:
After Jehovah’s refusal
to reconsider his judgment on Moses,
Moses continued
fully dedicated to his assignment.
In fact, the details make up
the book of Deuteronomy.
If you look at what happened
shortly before Jehovah’s words
here in chapter 32,
we find that Moses recited
a beautiful song of praise to Jehovah
following Jehovah’s words.
In chapter 33, we find Moses here
giving a blessing for the nation of Israel.
Do you see what happened to Moses?
Moses marked the lessons
and experiences in his life,
like Meribah.
He was not paralyzed
or broken by disappointment.
Rather, his resolve
to serve Jehovah faithfully
was strengthened.
What helped Moses?
How did he do it?
Consider at least two things
that may have helped Moses.
Number one:
Moses’ intimate friendship with Jehovah.
For example, why would Moses
even ask Jehovah
to reconsider his judgment on him?
Because Moses knew Jehovah intimately.
He knew him to be
“a God merciful and compassionate”
and “abundant in loving-kindness.”
And when Jehovah refused to reconsider,
Moses did not say a word.
Why?
Because Moses knew that Jehovah
was also a God ‘perfect in his activity
and that all his ways are justice.’
You see, from Moses’ example, we see
that the more intimate
our friendship is with Jehovah,
the more intimately
he can teach us and train us.
And thus, like Moses,
it will be easier to get past disappointment
and continue in our assignment
faithful and joyful.
Consider a second thing
that may have helped Moses,
and that was Job.
Remember, Moses wrote the book of Job
around 1473 B.C.E.,
around the same time as the events
that took place at Meribah of Kadesh.
The words are fresh in his mind.
Moses knew how Jehovah dealt with Job.
For example, at Job 38:3,
Jehovah said to Job:
“Brace yourself, please, like a man;
I will question you.”
Moses knew how Job responded to his problems
and to Jehovah’s correction.
For example, at Job 40:4,
Job said to Jehovah:
“I put my hand over my mouth.”
And Moses also knew
the final outcome
of the matters with Job.
Therefore, Moses was able to see
his own difficulties
and his own disappointments
through the prism of universal sovereignty,
and that gave Moses perspective.
So take advantage
of the inspired words of God
at your disposal.
Meditate deeply on the experiences
of Jehovah’s faithful servants
—like Job and like Moses.
These examples will give you perspective
and allow you to move on joyfully.
Brothers and sisters,
the simple truth is that
in our life of service to God,
we may be treated unfairly
and we will likely be disappointed at times.
Our expectations may not be met,
and we will respond poorly at times.
Mark the moment
as a lesson in life—a Meribah.
And if
—as was the case with Moses—
Jehovah marks it for you, be grateful.
Do not be paralyzed
or broken by disappointment.
Like Moses, fix in mind what you have to do.
Allow the experience or the lesson
to strengthen your resolve
to serve Jehovah faithfully and joyfully.
You can—if you mark your Meribah.